#summary Information about the development of the SSDS Software
#sidebar TableOfContents

==Setup the Development Environment==

In order to develop using the SSDS code base, there are some things you can install to help in the development process.  Here are some suggestions:

 # Install Java 6 SDK ([http://java.sun.com])
 # Install Maven ([http://maven.apache.org])
 # Install Ant ([http://ant.apache.org])
 # Install Eclipse 3.6 JEE version
 # Install the JBoss Tools
 ## Add update site JBoss 3.2 Tools with URL http://download.jboss.org/jbosstools/updates/development/
 ## I chose Application Development, Maven Support, Web and Java EE Development

== The Build Process ==

I use an ant script to build the components of the SSDS project.  Here are the steps that happen when ant gets run.

 # The path-defs.xml file gets imported.
  # The first thing that happens in the path-defs.xml file is that custom.properties file is read in.  These are the properties that somebody would edit when they are building their own SSDS installation.  There is a custom.properties.template file that can be used as a starting point for a custom.properties file.
  # The next thing that happens in the path-defs.xml file is that based on the database that was specified in the custom.properties file, a mysql.properties or a mssql.properties file is read in to establish all the appropriate properties for the backing database that the SSDS build will be utilizing.
  # Based on the database properties that were defined, some common database properties are read from the database specific properties so they could be used generically during the build.
  # Then build.properties are then loaded to get the rest of the properties for the SSDS build and configuration.
  # Then various filesets, paths and patternsets are created that will be used throughout the build.
  # And the last thing is that any necessary ant tasks are defined that will be needed during the build.